Bronchiectasis is a chronic structural
lung disease where the airways become permanently dilated and
damaged, leading to impaired mucus
clearance,
recurrent infections, and progressive lung
dysfunction.
For respiratory therapists, the key is
understanding the cycle.
Infection causes inflammation.
Inflammation damages the airway, and that
damage leads to mucus
buildup and more infection.
In bronchiectasis, the normal airway
defense system breaks down.
Thick secretions accumulate, ciliary
function is impaired,
and bacteria colonize the lungs.
Over time, this creates a vicious cycle of
inflammation and
infection that worsens airway damage.
Unlike asthma or COPD, this damage is
irreversible.
Clinically, patients often present with
chronic productive cough,
large amounts of sputum, frequent
infections,
and sometimes hemoptysis.
Breath sounds may include crackles,
ronchi,
or wheezing.
A major red flag is increasing sputum
volume, worsening dyspnea,
or signs of infection like fever and
fatigue.
Diagnosis is confirmed with a
high-resolution CT scan, which
shows dilated, thickened airways.
Pulmonary function tests often show an
obstructive pattern, but the
key distinction is the structural damage
seen on imaging.
Management focuses heavily on airway
clearance.
This is one of the most important roles
for the respiratory therapist.
Techniques include chest physiotherapy,
oscillatory devices,
and positive expiratory pressure therapy
to mobilize secretions.
Bronchodilators may be used to improve
airflow, and antibiotics are
critical during exacerbations or for
chronic suppression in some patients.
Hydration and mucolytics can also help
thin secretions, making them
easier to clear.
In severe cases, patients may require
oxygen therapy or advanced
interventions.
From a board prep perspective, always
think chronic productive cough,
recurrent infections, and airway dilation
on CT equals bronchiectasis.
And from an RT standpoint, remember that
secretion management is
not optional.
It is the cornerstone of care.
Ultimately, your goal is to break the
infection inflammation cycle,
improve airway clearance, and monitor for
worsening disease.
If you can recognize the pattern and
intervene early, you
can significantly improve patient
outcomes.